05-keycloak-getting-started/README.md, before:

# Keycloak Getting Started
In this section we will bet aking a look at how to setup Keycloak and access its metrics.

## Adding Keycloak
We add Keycloak to our docker-compose file in a similar way to the other applications, but with a few key differences:

```
services:
  keycloak:
    image: quay.io/keycloak/keycloak:26.0.5
    command: >
        start --hostname-strict=false --http-port=8080 --http-enabled=true --https-port=-1
    environment:
      - KC_BOOTSTRAP_ADMIN_USERNAME=kit
      - KC_BOOTSTRAP_ADMIN_PASSWORD=Test1234
      - KEYCLOAK_LOGLEVEL=DEBUG
      - DB_VENDOR=h2
      - KC_HEALTH_ENABLED=true #ENABLES HEALTH
      - KC_METRICS_ENABLED=true #ENABLES METRICS
      - KC_HTTP_METRICS_SLOS=50,100,150,200,250,300,350,400,450,500 #CUSTOMIZES METRICS
    networks:
      - monitoring101
    depends_on:
      java-app-a:
         condition: service_healthy
      java-app-b:
         condition: service_healthy
    ports:
      - "8092:8080"
      - "9000:9000" #MAKES METRICS ENDPOINT ACCESSIBLE

```

Keycloak can be started in a development mode using the start-dev command, however the a metrics endpoint cannot be created when using development mode. Because of this, we use the "start" command along with a few arguments which allow us to quickly start Keycloak without setting up HTTPS.

In order to enable the metrics endpoint, we have to:

1) Set the KC_HEALTH_ENABLED and KC_METRICS_ENABLED environment variables to true, which enable health and metrics endpoints respectively.

2) Mount port 8080 *and* port 9000. Port 8080 is the default port for most of Keycloak. The /metrics and /health are however by default located on port 9000.

3) Finally, we have to add the following code to prometheus.yml in order to make prometheus scrape Keycloak's /metrics endpoint:

```
 - job_name: keycloak
   metrics_path: /metrics
   static_configs:
    - targets:
       - keycloak:9000
```

After running docker compose, Keycloak can then be accessed at localhost:8092 and the metrics will be available at localhost:9000/metrics.

## Configuring Keycloak metrics

Keycloak comes with 3 environment variables which can be used to enable additional metrics that are useful for creating histograms. These are all set to false by default. The environment variables are:

1) KC_CACHE_METRICS_HISTOGRAMS_ENABLED. If set to true, buckets for various cache related metrics are enabled. These metrics do not appear to very useful. 

2) KC_HTTP_METRICS_HISTOGRAMS_ENABLED. If set to true, buckets for various HTTP related metrics are enabled. These metrics are not very useful, because the buckets are automatically set to completely random values.

3) KC_HTTP_METRICS_SLOS. If we set this environment variable to e.g. ```KC_HTTP_METRICS_SLOS=50,100,200,400```, something rather interesting happens. Similarly to when we set ```management_metrics_distribution_slo``` in chapter 4, custom buckets are generated for a variety of HTTP-related metrics. This is an example of what one of our metrics might look like after logging into Keycloak 20 times:

```
http_server_requests_seconds_bucket{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",le="0.05",} 11.0
http_server_requests_seconds_bucket{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",le="0.1",} 18.0
http_server_requests_seconds_bucket{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",le="0.2",} 19.0
http_server_requests_seconds_bucket{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",le="0.4",} 20.0
http_server_requests_seconds_bucket{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",le="+Inf",} 20.0
http_server_requests_seconds_count{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",} 20.0
http_server_requests_seconds_sum{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",} 1.202728308
```

These metrics tell us there were 20 successful login attempts which lasted a total of 1.20 seconds. 11 of the login attempts lasted less than 50ms, 7 of them lasted between 50 and 100ms, 1 of them lasted between 100 and 200ms, and 1 attempt lasted between 200 and 400ms.

Buckets can be customized to be any value in miliseconds, however all HTTP metrics will share the same bucket values. 

## What do all of these metrics mean?

One should be very careful when interpreting the meaning of each Keycloak metric. For some reason, Keycloak uses very unintuitive metric names.

vendor_statistics_number_of_entries{cache="users",cache_manager="keycloak",} is the total number of users registered.
http_server_requests_seconds_count{method="POST",outcome="SUCCESS",status="200",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",} is the number of failed logins (due to wrong password or similar)
http_server_requests_seconds_count{method="GET",outcome="SUCCESS",status="200",uri="/realms/{realm}/protocol/{protocol}/auth",} is the total number of successful logins

## Is it possible to customize metrics further?

A lot can be achieved simply by using the aforementioned environment variable KC_HTTP_METRICS_SLOS and Keycloak's built-in metrics. However, if this proves to be inadequate, one could consider looking into the Keycloak Metrics SPI https://github.com/aerogear/keycloak-metrics-spi. One should however note that a lot of the metrics added by Keycloak Metrics SPI already exist as default metrics in Keycloak, they're just named differently.

## How do we visualize and interpret Keycloak metrics?

### Using Time Series Graphs to visualize Login Times

Let's build a Grafana dashboard using the metrics we set up. Our first goal is to visualize how many logins finish in 50/100/200/400ms. We'll be doing exclusively using Grafana. However, as discussed in previous chapters, an alternative way of solving this  is to create custom metrics in our recording_rules.yml file. We'll be creating the following visualization:

![screenshot](images/keycloak_1.png)

In order to do this, we create a Grafana visualization with 4 separate queries. The first query is:

```
sum(increase(http_server_requests_seconds_bucket{method="POST", outcome="REDIRECTION", uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",le="0.05"}[24h])) 
/ 
sum(increase(http_server_requests_seconds_bucket{method="POST", outcome="REDIRECTION", uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate", le="+Inf"}[24h]))
```

This query first counts the increase in the number of successful login attempts which finished in 0.05 seconds during the past 24 hours. It then divides that number by the total increase in successful login attempts during the past 24 hours. This gives us the fraction of login attempts that finished in 0.05 seconds or less.

The 3 other queries do exactly the same, except for 0.10, 0.20 and 0.40 seconds respectively:

![screenshot](images/keycloak_2.png)

Finally, we adjust various settings in Grafana to make the visualization prettier and add a description. 

### Using Stats to get an Overview of Login Times

Time series graphs like the one we created are nice if one is interested in visualizing the change over the course of a period of time. It is however a good idea to supplement with time series visualizations with raw data using "Stat" visualization in Grafana:

![screenshot](images/keycloak_3.png)

Including this kind of statistics makes it very easy for users to get an overview of the current situation. From this visualization we can clearly see that the average login time today is 54.0ms - a tiny increase of 0.1% compared to yesterday.

In order to implement the Stat, we add a visualization with the following PromQL query to our Grafana dashboard:

```
sum(increase(http_server_requests_seconds_sum{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",}[24h]))
/ 
sum(increase(http_server_requests_seconds_count{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",}[24h]))
```

This query first calculates the total duration it took to process succesful login attempts during the past 24 hours. It then divides that by the total number of successful login attempts in the past 24 hours. This gives us the average login time.

In order to customize our stat further, we do 3 additional things in the options section for our "Stat" visualization:

1) We set the unit to seconds. This tells Grafana that the unit our data is stored in is seconds, and simultaneously gives Grafana the permission to convert our data to other units if it so wishes. In our case, Grafana chose to show the data in milliseconds.

![screenshot](images/keycloak_6.png)

2) We set thresholds to 0.1 for yellow and 0.2 for red. This tells Grafana that we want our number to be green if the average login time is less than 0.1 seconds; yellow if it's between 0.1 and 0.2 seconds; and red if above 0.2 seconds.

![screenshot](images/keycloak_5.png)

3) We tick "Show percentage change", which adds a number showing the change in login times compared to yesterday (in our case, 0.0998%). By default, this number is green when there's been an increase and red when there's been a decrease in our metric. For our data we want the opposite, since a decrease in login times is good. To achieve this, we select "Inverted" under "Percent change color mode". 

![screenshot](images/keycloak_4.png)

Commit message:

added visualizations to Keycloak dashboard

05-keycloak-getting-started/README.md, after:

# Keycloak Getting Started
In this section we will bet aking a look at how to setup Keycloak and access its metrics.

## Adding Keycloak
We add Keycloak to our docker-compose file in a similar way to the other applications, but with a few key differences:

```
services:
  keycloak:
    image: quay.io/keycloak/keycloak:26.0.5
    command: >
        start --hostname-strict=false --http-port=8080 --http-enabled=true --https-port=-1
    environment:
      - KC_BOOTSTRAP_ADMIN_USERNAME=kit
      - KC_BOOTSTRAP_ADMIN_PASSWORD=Test1234
      - KEYCLOAK_LOGLEVEL=DEBUG
      - DB_VENDOR=h2
      - KC_HEALTH_ENABLED=true #ENABLES HEALTH
      - KC_METRICS_ENABLED=true #ENABLES METRICS
      - KC_HTTP_METRICS_SLOS=50,100,150,200,250,300,350,400,450,500 #CUSTOMIZES METRICS
    networks:
      - monitoring101
    depends_on:
      java-app-a:
         condition: service_healthy
      java-app-b:
         condition: service_healthy
    ports:
      - "8092:8080"
      - "9000:9000" #MAKES METRICS ENDPOINT ACCESSIBLE

```

Keycloak can be started in a development mode using the start-dev command, however the a metrics endpoint cannot be created when using development mode. Because of this, we use the "start" command along with a few arguments which allow us to quickly start Keycloak without setting up HTTPS.

In order to enable the metrics endpoint, we have to:

1) Set the KC_HEALTH_ENABLED and KC_METRICS_ENABLED environment variables to true, which enable health and metrics endpoints respectively.

2) Mount port 8080 *and* port 9000. Port 8080 is the default port for most of Keycloak. The /metrics and /health are however by default located on port 9000.

3) Finally, we have to add the following code to prometheus.yml in order to make prometheus scrape Keycloak's /metrics endpoint:

```
 - job_name: keycloak
   metrics_path: /metrics
   static_configs:
    - targets:
       - keycloak:9000
```

After running docker compose, Keycloak can then be accessed at localhost:8092 and the metrics will be available at localhost:9000/metrics.

## Configuring Keycloak metrics

Keycloak comes with 3 environment variables which can be used to enable additional metrics that are useful for creating histograms. These are all set to false by default. The environment variables are:

1) KC_CACHE_METRICS_HISTOGRAMS_ENABLED. If set to true, buckets for various cache related metrics are enabled. These metrics do not appear to very useful. 

2) KC_HTTP_METRICS_HISTOGRAMS_ENABLED. If set to true, buckets for various HTTP related metrics are enabled. These metrics are not very useful, because the buckets are automatically set to completely random values.

3) KC_HTTP_METRICS_SLOS. If we set this environment variable to e.g. ```KC_HTTP_METRICS_SLOS=50,100,200,400```, something rather interesting happens. Similarly to when we set ```management_metrics_distribution_slo``` in chapter 4, custom buckets are generated for a variety of HTTP-related metrics. This is an example of what one of our metrics might look like after logging into Keycloak 20 times:

```
http_server_requests_seconds_bucket{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",le="0.05",} 11.0
http_server_requests_seconds_bucket{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",le="0.1",} 18.0
http_server_requests_seconds_bucket{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",le="0.2",} 19.0
http_server_requests_seconds_bucket{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",le="0.4",} 20.0
http_server_requests_seconds_bucket{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",le="+Inf",} 20.0
http_server_requests_seconds_count{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",} 20.0
http_server_requests_seconds_sum{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",} 1.202728308
```

These metrics tell us there were 20 successful login attempts which lasted a total of 1.20 seconds. 11 of the login attempts lasted less than 50ms, 7 of them lasted between 50 and 100ms, 1 of them lasted between 100 and 200ms, and 1 attempt lasted between 200 and 400ms.

Buckets can be customized to be any value in miliseconds, however all HTTP metrics will share the same bucket values. 

## What do all of these metrics mean?

One should be very careful when interpreting the meaning of each Keycloak metric. For some reason, Keycloak uses very unintuitive metric names.

vendor_statistics_number_of_entries{cache="users",cache_manager="keycloak",} is the total number of users registered.
http_server_requests_seconds_count{method="POST",outcome="SUCCESS",status="200",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",} is the number of failed logins (due to wrong password or similar)
http_server_requests_seconds_count{method="GET",outcome="SUCCESS",status="200",uri="/realms/{realm}/protocol/{protocol}/auth",} is the total number of successful logins

## Is it possible to customize metrics further?

A lot can be achieved simply by using the aforementioned environment variable KC_HTTP_METRICS_SLOS and Keycloak's built-in metrics. However, if this proves to be inadequate, one could consider looking into the Keycloak Metrics SPI https://github.com/aerogear/keycloak-metrics-spi. One should however note that a lot of the metrics added by Keycloak Metrics SPI already exist as default metrics in Keycloak, they're just named differently.

## How do we visualize and interpret Keycloak metrics?

### Using Time Series Graphs to visualize Login Times

Let's build a Grafana dashboard using the metrics we set up. Our first goal is to visualize how many logins finish in 50/100/200/400ms. We'll be doing exclusively using Grafana. However, as discussed in previous chapters, an alternative way of solving this  is to create custom metrics in our recording_rules.yml file. We'll be creating the following visualization:

![screenshot](images/keycloak_1.png)

In order to do this, we create a Grafana visualization with 4 separate queries. The first query is:

```
sum(increase(http_server_requests_seconds_bucket{method="POST", outcome="REDIRECTION", uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",le="0.05"}[24h])) 
/ 
sum(increase(http_server_requests_seconds_bucket{method="POST", outcome="REDIRECTION", uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate", le="+Inf"}[24h]))
```

This query first counts the increase in the number of successful login attempts which finished in 0.05 seconds during the past 24 hours. It then divides that number by the total increase in successful login attempts during the past 24 hours. This gives us the fraction of login attempts that finished in 0.05 seconds or less.

The 3 other queries do exactly the same, except for 0.10, 0.20 and 0.40 seconds respectively:

![screenshot](images/keycloak_2.png)

Finally, we adjust various settings in Grafana to make the visualization prettier and add a description. 

### Using Stats to get an Overview of Login Times

Time series graphs like the one we created are nice if one is interested in visualizing the change over the course of a period of time. It is however a good idea to supplement with time series visualizations with raw data using "Stat" visualization in Grafana:

![screenshot](images/keycloak_3.png)

Including this kind of statistics makes it very easy for users to get an overview of the current situation. From this visualization we can clearly see that the average login time is 54.0ms - a tiny increase of 0.1% during the past hour.

In order to implement the Stat, we add a visualization with the following PromQL query to our Grafana dashboard:

```
sum(increase(http_server_requests_seconds_sum{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",}[24h]))
/ 
sum(increase(http_server_requests_seconds_count{method="POST",outcome="REDIRECTION",status="302",uri="/realms/{realm}/login-actions/authenticate",}[24h]))
```

This query first calculates the total duration it took to process succesful login attempts during the past 24 hours. It then divides that by the total number of successful login attempts in the past 24 hours. This gives us the average login time.

In order to customize our stat further, we do 3 additional things in the options section for our "Stat" visualization:

1) We set the unit to seconds. This tells Grafana that the unit our data is stored in is seconds, and simultaneously gives Grafana the permission to convert our data to other units if it so wishes. In our case, Grafana chose to show the data in milliseconds.

![screenshot](images/keycloak_6.png)

2) We set thresholds to 0.1 for yellow and 0.2 for red. This tells Grafana that we want our number to be green if the average login time is less than 0.1 seconds; yellow if it's between 0.1 and 0.2 seconds; and red if above 0.2 seconds.

![screenshot](images/keycloak_5.png)

3) We tick "Show percentage change", which adds a number showing the change in login times (in our case, 0.0998%). By default, this number is green when there's been an increase and red when there's been a decrease in our metric. For our data we want the opposite, since a decrease in login times is good. To achieve this, we select "Inverted" under "Percent change color mode". 

![screenshot](images/keycloak_4.png)

**The number shown by "Show percentage change" represents how much something has changed over the time period displayed on the dashboard.** For example, if you're looking at data for the last hour, the number shows the change in that hour. If you switch to see data for the last 3 days, the number will show the change over those 3 days instead.
